>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MAY 22:
PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITS VIETNAM,
HIS FIRST STOP ON A WEEK-LONG
TRIP TO ASIA.
THE LEADER OF THE TALIBAN IS
KILLED BY A U.S. DRONE STRIKE
INSIDE PAKISTAN.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SYRIAN REFUGEES STUCK IN
LEBANON, HOPING FOR A NEW LIFE
IN ITALY.
>> SO, OUT OF MORE THAN A
MILLION REFUGEES HERE IN
LEBANON, IT'S BEEN NARROWED TO
101?
>> ONLY 101 WE CAN MOVE.
SO YEAH, THESE ARE THE LUCKIEST,
MAYBE.
>> Stewart: NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA HAS BEGUN
A THREE-DAY VISIT TO VIETNAM,
STARTING A WEEK-LONG TRIP IN
ASIA MEANT TO ENHANCE TRADE AND
SECURITY TIES WITH ALLIES IN THE
REGION.
THE PRESIDENT ARRIVED IN
VIETNAM'S CAPITAL, HANOI, IN HIS
FIRST VISIT TO THE FORMER ENEMY
OF THE UNITED STATES.
VIETNAMESE LEADERS ARE LOOKING
FOR OBAMA TO LIFT THE LONG-
STANDING U.S. EMBARGO ON SELLING
WEAPONS TO VIETNAM, AS A
DETERRENT TO THE GROWING
INFLUENCE OF NEIGHBORING CHINA.
THE PRESIDENT IS EXPECTED TO
PRESSURE VIETNAM TO IMPROVE ITS
RECORD ON HUMAN RIGHTS, AND TOUT
HIS PROPOSED 12-NATION TRANS-
PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP TRADE DEAL.
VIETNAM NOW EXPORTS MORE
MANUFACTURED GOODS TO THE U.S.
THAN ANY OTHER SOUTHEAST ASIAN
NATION, AND TRADE BETWEEN THE
TWO NATIONS HAS REACHED
$45 BILLION A YEAR.
OBAMA IS THE THIRD PRESIDENT IN
A ROW TO VISIT VIETNAM, AND
HE'LL GO TO JAPAN NEXT.
FOR MORE ON PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
ASIA TRIP, DAVID NAKUMARA JOINS
ME BY SKYPE.
EVERYONE WANTS SOMETHING FROM
THE VISIT.
WHAT DOES THE U.S. WANT FROM
VIETNAM AND WHAT DOES VIETNAM
WANT FROM THE U.S.?
>> I THINK YOU WILL SEE
PRESIDENT OBAMA SPEND HIS TWO
DAYS HERE IN HANOI TOUTING THE
WARMING OF RELATIONS.
THIS IS HAPPENING ON THE
ECONOMIC SIDE WITH NEW TRADE
DEAL THAT IN IN PLAY HERE
BETWEEN COUNTRIES AND ALSO ON
THE SECURITY SIDE AND THE MAIN
DRIVING REASON IS NOT JUST THE
WARMING RELATIONS BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES BUT THE SPECTER OF
CHINA AND ITS INFLUENCE IN THE
REGION.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TALKED ABOUT
SHIFTING U.S. POLICY AWAY FROM
THE MIDDLE EAST AND AWAY FROM
EUROPE TO SOME DEGREE AND
CENTERED ON ASIA.
THERE IS A LOT OF COMPETITION
WITH CHINA ON SECURITY IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA AND YOU WILL SEE
VIETNAM WANTING MORE REASSURANCE
FROM THE UNITED STATES BOTH ON
POTENTIAL LIFTING OF AN ARMS
EMBARGO IN PLACE SINCE THE END
OF THE VIETNAM WAR AND ECONOMIC
INVESTMENT.
AND THE PRESIDENT IS TOUTING THE
ASIAN TRADE DEAL HE WILL TALK
ABOUT THE MERITS FOR U.S.
COMPANIES AND U.S. WORKERS AND
BECAUSE ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL
THERE IS A LOT OF TALK ABOUT
TRADE WITH DONALD TRUMP AND ON
THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE.
YOU WILL SEE THE PRESIDENT
TALKING ABOUT THESE THINGS.
>> LET'S UNPACK THAT A LITTLE
BIT.
YOU WROTE ABOUT AMERICAN
COMPANIES WHO ARE MANUFACTURING
QUITE A BIT IN VIETNAM.
TELL US MORE ABOUT THAT?
>> WHAT IS INTERESTING THE
TRENDS GLOBALLY BEFORE THIS
TRADE DEAL WHICH HAS BEEN
ASSIGNED TO THE COUNTRIES BUT
NOT APPROVED BY THE CONGRESS.
A LOT OF COMPANIES ARE MOVING
MANUFACTURING FROM CHINA WHICH
HAD BEEN BOOMING FOR A NUMBER OF
YEARS TO VIETNAM BASED ON LOWER
WAGES AND MORE RELIABLE LABOR
CHAINS.
AND WHAT IS INTERESTING IS THE
PRESIDENT IS SAYING LOOK THIS IS
A TREND THAT IS UNDERWAY.
A LOT OF U.S. MANUFACTURING HAS
BEEN OFFSHORE IN CHINA AND
MOVING TO VIETNAM.
WE WANT TO BE IN PLAY IN VIETNAM
AND U.S. COMPANIES ARE
RESPONDING SAYING YES IT MAKES
SENSE, THE TRADE DEAL WOULD
LOWER TARIFFS ON SHOES AND
APPAREL AND TEXTILES.
WHY NOT GET IN WITH VIETNAM, AND
VIETNAM'S ECONOMY IS POISED TO
MOVE ON THIS.
AND THIS TRADE DEAL COULD DO
THAT AND THAT COULD LOWER PRICES
FOR U.S. CONSUMERS IF IT'S
EASIER TO MAKE THE TARIFFS
LOWER.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT A LOT OF
UNIONS AND LABOR ORGANIZATIONS
IN THE UNITED STATES ARE SAYING
WE HAVE BEEN DECIMATED BY THIS
OFFSHORING IN MANUFACTURING AND
THIS WILL MAKE IT WORSE.
YOU HAVE PEOPLE SAYING BOTH
SIDES THERE'S BENEFITS FOR THE
U.S. AND VIETNAM AND THE U.S. IS
SAYING THAT IS A WAY TO DRAW
VIETNAM CLOSER AND RAISE LABOR
AND ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS IN
VIETNAM AND OTHER COUNTRIES AS
PART OF THE DEAL.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT THE ARMS
EMBARGO.
IF IT IS LIFTED WHAT GUARANTEE
DOES THE UNITED STATES HAVE THAT
VIETNAM WILL ADDRESS HUMAN
RIGHTS ABUSES FOR EXAMPLE?
>> WELL, THERE IS NO GREAT
GUARANTEES.
THE QUESTION IS BOTH ON THE ARMS
EMBARGO AS THE TRADE DEAL AND
THE TRADE DEAL THEY GOT A
SEPARATE AGREEMENT WITH VIETNAM
SPECIFYING SPECIFIC MEASURES
THEY WOULD TAKE TO PROTECT LABOR
AND WORKERS.
HUMAN RIGHTS IT'S FREE SPEECH
AND VIETNAM HAS SHOWN EFFORT AND
FREED A POLITICAL PRISONER ON
THE EVE OF THE PRESIDENT COMING
HERE BUT THE U.S. WANTS TO SEE
MORE AND THERE'S PRESSURE IN THE
UNITED STATES NOT TO LIFT THE
EMBARGO AMONG HUMAN RIGHTS
GROUPS.
YOU SAW THE AIDES COME HERE LAST
WEEK TO SEE WHETHER VIETNAM WAS
READY.
THEY LIFTED PART OF THE EMBARGO
TWO YEARS AGO BASED ON MARITIME
SECURITY BECAUSE OF SOME OF THE
CONCERNS ABOUT WHAT IS HAPPENING
WITH THE CHINESE NAVY.
AND NOW THERE IS A QUESTION
WHETHER THIS IS A BROADER
EMBARGO.
YOU MIGHT SEE POTENTIAL LIFTING
SOMETHING THAT WILL TAKE TIME
OVER TIME TO SORT OF SEE HOW
VIETNAM MAKES PROGRESS ON HUMAN
RIGHTS AND IF THEY DON'T, MAYBE
THEY WILL NOT SELL CERTAIN TYPES
OF WEAPONS.
EVEN IF THEY ANNOUNCE A LIFTING
OF THE EMBARGO IT COULD TAKE
SEVERAL YEARS FOR THE DEFENSIVE
WEAPONS TO BE ACTUALLY
EXCHANGED.
AND THAT WOULD GIVE THE U.S. NOT
ONLY THIS ADMINISTRATION BUT A
SUCCESSOR TIME TO JUDGE WHETHER
VIETNAM MOVED ENOUGH.
>> DAVID NAKUMARA FROM THE
"WASHINGTON POST" THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
AFGHANISTAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
SAID TODAY AN AMERICAN AIR
STRIKE DID KILL THE LEADER OF
THE ANTI-GOVERNMENT TALIBAN,
MULLAH AKHTAR MANSOUR,
YESTERDAY.
U.S. HOMELAND SECURITY SECRETARY
JEH JOHNSON SAID, "IT APPEARS
LIKELY" MANSOUR WAS KILLED, BUT
IT COULD BE A FEW DAYS BEFORE
THE U.S. HAD THE EVIDENCE
CONFIRMING THAT.
A U.S. DRONE STRUCK A VEHICLE
TRANSPORTING MANSOUR JUST ACROSS
THE AFGHAN BORDER IN PAKISTAN.
PAKISTAN'S FOREIGN MINISTRY SAID
THE ATTACK AUTHORIZED BY
PRESIDENT OBAMA VIOLATED ITS
SOVEREIGNTY.
AFGHAN CHIEF EXECUTIVE ABDULLAH
ABDULLAH SAID MANSOUR'S DEATH
WOULD HAVE A POSITIVE IMPACT ON
ATTEMPTS TO BRING PEACE TO
AFGHANISTAN.
JOINING ME NOW BY SKYPE TO
DISCUSS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE
U.S. MILITARY STRIKE ON THE
TALIBAN'S LEADER IS JENNIFER
GLASSE, A FREELANCE REPORTER NOW
IN AFGHANISTAN'S CAPITAL, KABUL.
JENNIFER TELL US MORE ABOUT WHO
HE WAS WITHIN THE HIERARCHY OF
THE TALIBAN?
>> HE WAS A TALIBAN LEADER HE
LOOK OVER LAST SUMMER.
IT WAS A BIT OF A CONTROVERSY
BECAUSE WHEN HE TOOK OVER AFTER
THE ANNOUNCEMENT THAT OMAR HAD
BEEN DEAD FOR TWO YEARS, THERE
WAS A BIT OF A POWER STRUGGLE
AND DIVISION AMONG THE TALIBAN
UNDER MANSOUR THEY TOOK
TERRITORY IN AFGHANISTAN AND
THEY TOOK HINDUS FOR A FEW DAYS
THE FIRST TIME THEY HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO TAKE A CITY THAT SIZE
AFGHANISTAN'S FIFTH LARGEST
CITY.
THEY CONTROL MORE TERRITORY AND
CONTEST MORE TERRITORY THAN THEY
HAVE SINCE 2001.
SO UNDER THE TALIBAN REALLY SAW
A RESURGENCE AND STRENGTH.
BUT THEY WERE FRACTURED.
>> WHY WOULD THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION CONSIDER HIM A
WORTHY TARGET WORTH SENDING
DRONES AFTER?
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE THE
ORDER HIMSELF.
NORMALLY THE AMERICAN FORCES
CANNOT TARGET THE TALIBAN AND I
ASKED THAT QUESTION AND THEY
MADE THE DECISION BECAUSE HE AND
HIS FIGHTERS WERE PLANNING
ATTACKS AGAINST AFGHAN FORCES
AND AMERICAN FORCES AND
THEREFORE WERE A THREAT TO U.S.
FORCES.
AND THAT IS THE JUSTIFICATION
THEY USED FOR THE DRONE STRIKE
THAT KILLED HIM.
>> WHAT DOES THIS DRONE STRIKE
AND THE DEATH MEAN FOR THE PEACE
TALKS AND THE PEACE PROCESS?
>> THAT IS THE BIG QUESTION
RIGHT NOW.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN WITH THE PEACE
PROCESS, HOW WILL THINGS GO FROM
NOW ON?
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF
THE COUNTRY SAID IN AFGHANISTAN
TODAY HE HOPES THAT IT WILL
BRING THE TALIBAN INTO THE PEACE
PROCESS.
BUT IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT WILL
HAPPEN NOW.
WHETHER THERE WILL BE A POWER
STRUGGLE TO SEE WHO REPLACES HIM
AND WHETHER THE TALIBAN WILL
CONTINUE FIGHTING AS THEY HAVE
WITH THE AFGHAN FORCES TAKING
PUNISHING CASUALTIES ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
AND WHAT THE PEACE PROCESS WILL
REVIVE.
AFTER A BOMBING HERE IN KABUL
THAT KILLED SIX 4 PEOPLE --
64 PEOPLE, THE PRESIDENT
HARDENED HIS STANCE AGAINST
PAKISTAN AND THE TALIBAN SAYING
THAT PAKISTAN WAS A HARBORING
THE TALIBAN AND THE FACT THAT HE
WAS KILLED IN PAKISTAN REALLY
BEARS THEM OUT.
AND WE HAVE NOT SEEN A LOT OF
REACTION FROM PAKISTAN.
THE LAST TIME THE AMERICANS
LAUNCHED A BIG OPERATION IN
PAKISTAN WAS IN 2011 THE
ASSAULTS AND THE KILLING OF
OSAMA BIN LADEN AND AFTER THAT
HAPPENED THERE WAS A HUGE
OUTRAGE IN AFGHANISTAN THAT THE
AMERICANS HAD DONE SOMETHING ON
SOVEREIGN TERRITORY.
IT IS A QUIET IN PAKISTAN RIGHT
NOW.
PAKISTAN SAYS THEY WANT THE
PEACE PROCESS TO GO FORWARD BUT
AFGHANISTAN SAYS THEY WANT TO
SEE SOME PROGRESS SO IT'S
UNCLEAR RIGHT NOW WHAT HAPPENS
WITH THE NEXT STEP WILL BE FOR
THE TALIBAN AND WHAT THE NEXT
STEP WILL BE IN TRYING TO MOVE
THE PEACE PROCESS FORWARD.
>> JENNIFER GLASSE THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> Stewart: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY, WHO JOINS THE
PRESIDENT IN VIETNAM TOMORROW,
WAS ALSO IN ASIA TODAY, TO OFFER
SUPPORT FOR THE NEW GOVERNMENT
IN MYANMAR, FORMERLY KNOWN AS
BURMA.
KERRY MET WITH NOBEL LAUREATE
AUNG SAN SUU KYI, WHO LED HER
PARTY TO A SWEEPING VICTORY IN
LAST YEAR'S PARLIAMENTARY
ELECTIONS.
SHE IS THE NATION'S DE FACTO
LEADER AND OFFICIALLY, ITS
FOREIGN MINISTER.
KERRY URGED THE CIVILIAN-LED
GOVERNMENT TO STAY ON ITS COURSE
OF DEMOCRATIC REFORM.
KERRY ALSO MET WITH THE
COMMANDER OF MYANMAR'S ARMED
FORCES.
UNDER THE COUNTRY'S
CONSTITUTION, THE MILITARY
RETAINS A QUARTER OF THE SEATS
IN THE COUNTRY'S PARLIAMENT.
KERRY SAID THAT NEEDS TO CHANGE
BEFORE THE U.S. LIFTS ITS
REMAINING SANCTIONS.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION LAST
WEEK LIFTED SANCTIONS ON 10
STATE-RUN COMPANIES AND BANKS
IMPOSED DURING MYANMAR'S
MILITARY RULE.
EGYPT HAS DEPLOYED A ROBOTIC
SUBMARINE TO THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA, WHERE EGYPTAIR FLIGHT 804
DISAPPEARED ON THURSDAY.
IN HIS FIRST REMARKS SINCE THE
CRASH, EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT ABDEL-
FATTAH EL-SISSI SAID TODAY THE
SUB CAN OPERATE 10,000 FEET
BELOW THE WATER'S SURFACE AND
WILL SEARCH FOR THE BLACK BOXES-
- THE COCKPIT VOICE AND DATA
RECORDERS.
FRENCH INVESTIGATORS SAID
YESTERDAY THE AIRBUS 320 SENT
WARNINGS THAT SMOKE HAD BEEN
DETECTED ONBOARD JUST BEFORE THE
PLANE VANISHED FROM RADAR.
BUT EL-SISSI WARNED AGAINST
SPECULATION, SAYING, "ALL
SCENARIOS ARE POSSIBLE."
THE PLANE WAS CARRYING 66
PASSENGERS AND CREW FROM PARIS
TO CAIRO.
READ HOW AN ARTIST FOUND
UNEXPECTED INSPIRATION WHEN HIS
COMPUTER BEGAN PRODUCING
MISTAKES.
VISIT PBS.ORG/NEWHOUR.
>> Stewart: THE SYRIAN
CIVIL WAR HAS DISPLACED 11
MILLION PEOPLE AND 400,000 HAVE
DIED DURING THE CONFLICT.
FIVE MILLION SYRIANS HAVE BECOME
REFUGEES, WHO HAVE MIGRATED NOT
ONLY TO EUROPE, BUT IN GREATER
NUMBERS TO NEIGHBORING TURKEY,
JORDAN, AND LEBANON.
LEBANON, SYRIA'S NEIGHBOR TO THE
SOUTH, NOW HAS THE DISTINCTION
OF HAVING THE MOST REFUGEES PER
CAPITA OF ANY COUNTRY IN THE
WORLD.
CURRENTLY, ONE IN FIVE PEOPLE
LIVING IN LEBANON IS A REFUGEE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY WENT TO
LEBANON TO SEE HOW THE COUNTRY
IS COPING, AND ABOUT ONE EFFORT
TO HELP THE REFUGEES FIND A
BETTER LIFE.
>> Reporter: IN LEBANON, SYRIAN
REFUGEES ARE SCATTERED AROUND
THE COUNTRY.
THE LARGEST CONCENTRATION LIVES
JUST A 15-MINUTE DRIVE FROM THE
SYRIAN BORDER, IN TENTS IN CAMPS
IN THE BEKAA VALLEY.
OTHER REFUGEES FIND SHELTER IN
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS LIKE THIS
ONE IN THE CAPITAL, BEIRUT.
STILL OTHERS RESIDE IN CORDONED-
OFF AREAS WITHIN CITIES THAT
HAVE BECOME REFUGEE GHETTOS.
THAT'S WHERE I MET THE WOMAN WHO
ASKED US TO CALL HER "SUHA" FOR
HER PROTECTION.
SHE LEFT THE BESIEGED CITY OF
HOMS, SYRIA, THREE-AND-A-HALF
YEARS AGO, FLEEING A CIVIL WAR
SHE DESCRIBES AS A FIRE.
>> THE WAR BEGAN SUDDENLY.
BURNED EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS HER FAMILY
DIDN'T TAKE SIDES, BUT THAT
DIDN'T PROTECT THEM FROM
SOLDIERS LOYAL TO SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
>> MY BROTHER KILLED, WAS
KILLED.
>> Reporter: WHAT HAPPENED?
>> THEY SHOT HIM IN THE BACK,
AND HE DIED.
>> Reporter: SUHA CAME TO
SUSPECT HER OWN HUSBAND WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR HER BROTHER'S
DEATH.
>> I DISCOVERED HE IS A DOUBLE
AGENT.
>> Reporter: SO HE WAS WORKING
FOR THE REGIME?
>> AFTER A LONG TIME, I
DISCOVERED THAT.
>> Reporter: CONFUSED AND
FEARING FOR HER LIFE, SUHA LEFT
HER HUSBAND AND ESCAPED TO
LEBANON BY PAYING A SMUGGLER TO
DRIVE HER AND HER TWO CHILDREN
ACROSS THE BORDER.
SHE LIVES ON THE FIFTH FLOOR OF
THIS RUNDOWN BUILDING WITH HER
9-YEAR-OLD SON, RA'AD, AND
DAUGHTER, RAGHAD, WHO'S FOUR.
ELECTRICITY IS ON ONLY A FEW
HOURS A DAY.
SO SHE HAS NO REFRIGERATOR.
HER BIGGEST WORRY IS HER
CHILDREN'S SAFETY.
>> THIS IS MISERABLE FOR THE
KIDS.
THEY KNOW THERE ARE GUNS
EVERYWHERE, EVERYWHERE.
EVERYWHERE.
>> Reporter: YOU WANT YOUR
CHILDREN TO GROW UP IN PEACE?
>> YES, THAT'S WHAT I WANT.
>> Reporter: SUHA IS GOING TO
GET HER WISH.
A FEW MONTHS AGO, AN ITALIAN
CHRISTIAN CHARITY PROJECT
CALLED"
HUMANITARIAN CORRIDOR" SELECTED
HER FAMILY TO RESETTLE IN ITALY.
THE SAME PEOPLE HELPED THE
VATICAN CHOOSE THREE SYRIAN
FAMILIES TO FLY WITH POPE
FRANCIS FROM GREECE TO ITALY IN
APRIL.
GIANCARLO PENZA IS INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS DIRECTOR OF THE
PARTICIPATING CHARITY COMUNITA'
DI SANT'EGIDIO.
>> THE POPE, HE CALLED US TO
CHOOSE THE PEOPLE.
TWELVE PEOPLE.
IT'S A GESTURE.
IN ORDER TO SHOW WHAT HE WAS
DOING IS EASY, IS REASONABLE,
AND HE'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: HUMANITARIAN
CORRIDOR INTENDS TO TRANSPORT
600 SYRIAN AND IRAQI REFUGEES
FROM LEBANON TO ITALY DURING THE
NEXT TWO YEARS.
THE CHARITY PROJECT SCREENS THE
CANDIDATES, OBTAINS HARD-TO-GET
HUMANITARIAN VISAS, AND ARRANGES
THEIR FLIGHTS.
SIMONE SCOTTA IS A FIELD OFFICER
FOR THE N.G.O. MEDITERRANEAN
HOPE.
HE HELPS RUN THE PROJECT AND
INITIALLY INTERVIEWED SUHA, WHO
IS ON THE LIST FOR THE NEXT
AIRLIFT.
THIS IS THE LIST?
>> YES, THIS IS THE LIST OF 101
PEOPLE THAT WILL LEAVE IN TWO
DAYS.
>> Reporter: 101 PEOPLE?
>> 101, YES.
>> Reporter: SO, OUT OF MORE
THAN A MILLION REFUGEES HERE IN
LEBANON, IT'S BEEN NARROWED TO
101?
>> ONLY 101 WE CAN MOVE.
SO YEAH, THESE ARE THE LUCKIEST,
MAYBE.
>> Reporter: THE LUCKIEST MET
CERTAIN CRITERIA.
THEY WERE CONSIDERED ESPECIALLY
VULNERABLE BUT ALSO LIKELY TO
ASSIMILATE IN ITALIAN SOCIETY.
SUHA WAS A VETERINARIAN BACK IN
SYRIA.
>> SHE'S ALWAYS WORKED IN HER
LIFE, AND WE ARE SURE THAT SHE
WILL FIND HER WAY IN ITALY.
>> SOME THINGS ARE UNKNOWN TO
ME-- WHERE I'M SLEEPING, THE
HOUSE, THE AREA, THE NEIGHBORS.
BUT I THINK EVERYTHING WILL BE
OKAY.
>> Reporter: HAVE YOU PACKED
YOUR BAGS ALREADY?
>> YES, YES.
(LAUGHS)
YES.
>> Reporter: SUHA IS GIVING AWAY
THE FEW POSSESSIONS SHE HAS TO
HER FELLOW REFUGEES.
>> ONE JACKET FOR RA'AD AND ONE
JACKET FOR RAGHAD.
>> Reporter: MOST OF WHAT HER
FAMILY IS TAKING FITS IN ONE
SUITCASE.
ONE CHANGE OF CLOTHES FOR
YOURSELF AND ONE CHANGE OF
CLOTHES FOR EACH OF YOUR KIDS.
THAT'S IT?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: THAT'S THREE LIVES
INSIDE OF ONE SUITCASE?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: MIXED WITH THE
EXCITEMENT IS SADNESS.
SUHA HAS FRIENDS WHO DESPERATELY
WANT A NEW START TOO, LIKE
GHYSA, WHO IS ALSO FROM HOMS.
GHYSA LOST EVERYTHING SHE OWNED
IN SYRIA AND BARES THE SCARS OF
WAR; SHE WAS SHOT IN THE LEG BY
A SNIPER.
NOT AMONG THE CHOSEN, SHE'S
STAYING BEHIND IN LEBANON.
>> WE KNOW MANY FAMILIES.
WE JUST CANNOT HELP EVERYBODY,
SO WE NEED TO CHOOSE.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S THAT LIKE TO
SAY NO?
>> MOST OF THEM THEY UNDERSTAND,
BECAUSE WE EXPLAIN TO THEM IN A
VERY CLEAR WAY LIKE WE HAVE A
TINY NUMBER, AND THERE ARE
PEOPLE THAT DESERVE MORE HELP
THAN YOU.
MANY OF THEM UNDERSTAND, BUT
OTHER TIMES PEOPLE GET PISSED.
>> Reporter: TENSIONS ARE HIGH
AMONG REFUGEES, AND WITHIN
LEBANESE SOCIETY.
NORA JUMBLATT, A BUSINESSWOMAN
AND PHILANTHROPIST IN BEIRUT,
SAYS LEBANON HAS A LONG HISTORY
OF HELPING REFUGEES IN THE
REGION.
BUT THE WELCOME MAT HAS WORN
THIN.
>> WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THAT WE
HAVE PALESTINIAN REFUGEES.
AND WE ALSO HAVE HAD AN INFLUX
OF IRAQI REFUGEES AT ONE POINT.
IT IS A VERY DIFFICULT
SITUATION, AND IT IS A VERY
PRECARIOUS SITUATION, BECAUSE
THE STRAIN ON THE
INFRASTRUCTURE, ON WATER, ON
ELECTRICITY, ON JOBS, IS HUGE.
>> Reporter: SYRIAN REFUGEES ARE
NOT OFFICIALLY ALLOWED TO WORK
IN LEBANON, BUT MANY DO, MAINLY
IN CONSTRUCTION AND THE SERVICE
SECTOR.
THIS LEBANESE JEWELRY STORE
OWNER COMPLAINS: SYRIAN REFUGEES
ARE HURTING AN ALREADY FRAGILE
ECONOMY.
>> (translated): THEY'RE
IMPACTING OUR MEDICAL CARE, AND
TAKING THE AID THAT'S MEANT FOR
THE POOR PEOPLE OF OUR COUNTRY.
THEY'RE TAKING MANY THINGS, FROM
ELECTRICITY TO GAS EXPENSES, AND
TAKING IT FOR A LESSER PRICE.
>> Reporter: REFUGEES WHO RELIED
ON THEIR SAVINGS TO SURVIVE HAVE
FOUND THAT AFTER FIVE YEARS OF
WAR, THEIR MONEY IS RUNNING OUT,
AND SYRIAN CURRENCY IS WORTH
MUCH LESS THAN IT USED TO BE.
>> THIS ONE, IT'S ABOUT $20
BEFORE THE WAR.
BEFORE THE WAR, IT'S $20.
NOW, IT'S $2.
>> Reporter: OMAR'S MONEY
EXCHANGE STORE IS ON ONE OF
BEIRUT'S BUSIEST SHOPPING
STREETS.
>> IF YOU WALK HERE, EACH TWO
METERS, THREE METERS, THERE'S A
LITTLE BOY OR A LITTLE GIRL AND
HER MOTHER.
>> Reporter: SO LITTLE KIDS
BEGGING IN THE STREET?
>> YEAH, BEGGING.
>> Reporter: THIS BOY WAS
BEGGING FOR MONEY TO BUY GUM TO
RESELL ON THE STREET.
HE DOESN'T GO TO SCHOOL.
GETTING SYRIAN REFUGEE CHILDREN
INTO SCHOOL IS ONE GOAL OF NORA
JUMBLATT'S FOUNDATION, CALLED
KAYANY.
IT HAS BUILT PRIVATE SCHOOLS
THAT CAN ACCOMMODATE 2,500 KIDS.
BUT THAT'S A FRACTION OF THE
NEED.
WHY AREN'T THESE SYRIAN CHILDREN
GOING TO LEBANESE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS?
>> BECAUSE OF LACK OF SPACE.
WE HAVE ABOUT 155,000 REFUGEE
CHILDREN GOING TO LEBANESE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, BUT THERE ARE
350,000 THAT ARE STILL IN NEED.
>> Reporter: 350,000 SYRIAN
REFUGEES WHO AREN'T GETTING
EDUCATION?
>> YES, WHO ARE NOT GETTING.
AND THIS IS, OF COURSE, A VERY
DANGEROUS AFFAIR, BECAUSE THIS
IS THE FUTURE OF SYRIA.
THESE CHILDREN SHOULD GO BACK TO
BUILD SYRIA.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S WHAT THE
LEBANESE ARE HOPING FOR: THE WAR
TO END, AND THE SYRIANS TO
RETURN HOME.
SUHA WANTS THAT TOO.
BUT FOR NOW, THANKS TO THE
CHARITY PROJECT, SHE'S LEAVING
WITH HER CHILDREN TO START A NEW
LIFE IN ITALY, TODAY.
ARE THE KIDS EXCITED, READY TO
GO?
>> MORE THAN ME.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: THEY TAKE SOME LAST
MINUTE PHOTOS...
...AND SAY THEIR GOODBYES.
>> BYE!
>> Reporter: WHEN THE FAMILY
ARRIVES AT THE FIRST MEETING
POINT, THEY MEET OTHER REFUGEE
FAMILIES ON THE AIRLIFT.
SUITCASES LABELED, THEY BOARD
THE BUS FOR BEIRUT.
OUT THE WINDOW, THE
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
SUHA WAS ONCE DESPERATE ENOUGH
TO CONSIDER PAYING A SMUGGLER TO
TAKE THEM TO EUROPE BY BOAT.
BUT HER SON RA'AD, WHO'D SEEN
STORIES ON TV ABOUT CHILDREN
DROWNING, SAID NO.
AND SUHA AGREED.
THEY ARRIVE IN BEIRUT, WHERE
THEY MEET STILL MORE REFUGEES
FROM SYRIA-- FAMILIES BOUND FOR
DIFFERENT CITIES AROUND ITALY.
AND THEN ANOTHER BUS RIDE TO THE
AIRPORT TO CATCH THEIR 4:00 A.M.
FLIGHT.
>> ITALIA!
ITALIA!
HOO, HOO!
>> Reporter: TWO WEEKS LATER, I
MET UP WITH SUHA IN THE
RIVERSIDE TOWN OF 10,000 PEOPLE
IN NORTHERN ITALY WHERE SHE AND
HER CHILDREN NOW LIVE.
GRAZIE.
>> PREGO!
>> Reporter: FOR NOW, HER FAMILY
IS SHARING A ONE-BEDROOM
APARTMENT WITH AN ELDERLY SYRIAN
WOMAN WHO LEFT LEBANON ON THE
SAME CHRISTIAN CHARITY FLIGHT.
>> I SLEEP HERE, AND THE OLD
WOMAN, WITH ME, HERE BECAUSE SHE
COULDN'T GO UP.
>> Reporter: THEY HAVE RELIABLE
ELECTRICITY AND A PROPER
KITCHEN.
>> REFRIGERATOR!
>> Reporter: YOU HAVE A
REFRIGERATOR?
>> Reporter: YOU'VE GOT A STOVE,
YOU'VE GOT AN OVEN.
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: THERE'S A BIG PARK
BEHIND THEIR APARTMENT WHERE THE
CHILDREN CAN PLAY.
THEY START SCHOOL NEXT WEEK.
>> I WANT TO HAVE TIME TO LEARN
AND TO WORK.
>> Reporter: UNDER ITALIAN LAW,
IT WILL BE A FEW MONTHS BEFORE
SUHA IS ELIGIBLE TO WORK.
SHE'S HOPING TO RESUME WORK AS A
VETERINARIAN.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE CHARITY
MEDITERRANEAN HOPE IS PAYING THE
RENT AND WILL GIVE SUHA'S FAMILY
$780 A MONTH FOR AT LEAST THE
NEXT SIX MONTHS.
SHE SAYS SHE WOULD LIKE TO
RETURN TO SYRIA SOMEDAY.
>> TO FIND A SOLUTION IN SYRIA,
I THINK IT'S FAR AWAY.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS
SAFENESS.
THAT'S WHAT I FEEL.
EVERYTHING ELSE WILL COME.
>> Reporter: FROM CIVIL WAR IN
SYRIA, TO A REFUGEE CAMP IN
LEBANON, TO A NEW BEGINNING IN
ITALY.
>> I HOPE GOOD THINGS WILL
HAPPEN.
I'M HOPEFUL.
REALLY.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: TODAY'S PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION RUNOFF IN AUSTRIA
PITTED TWO MEN WITH
DIAMETRICALLY OPPOSED VIEWS.
NORBERT HOEFER OF THE
NATIONALIST, ANTI-IMMIGRATION
FREEDOM PARTY FINISHED FIRST IN
THE FIRST ROUND LAST MONTH.
IF HOEFER SHOULD WIN, HE'D BE
AUSTRIA'S AND THE E.U.'S FIRST
FAR-RIGHT HEAD OF STATE.
HE'S OPPOSED BY FORMER GREEN
PARTY LEADER ALEXANDER VAN DER
BELLEN, WHO SUPPORTS ADMITTING
REFUGEES.
HOEFER HAS A SMALL LEAD IN WHAT
HAS BEEN A VERY CLOSE RACE BUT
THERE ARE ABSENTEE BALLOTS STILL
TO BE COUNTED, WITH THE OUTCOME
EXPECTED TOMORROW.
EARLIER, I TALKED ABOUT THIS
ELECTION WITH REPORTER ZEKE
TURNER OF "THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL," WHO JOINED ME VIA
SKYPE FROM AUSTRIA'S CAPITAL,
VIENNA.
WHY IS IT THAT THE CENTRISTS
WERE KNOCKED OUT SO EARLY?
WHAT IS GOING ON THAT YOU HAD
CANDIDATES THAT ARE SUCH OPTS
OPPOSITES.
>> THIS IS A QUESTION ECHOING IN
GERMANY BECAUSE IN THIS PART OF
THE WORLD THEY MAKE THE GRAND
COALITION WHEN TWO BIG PARTIES
FROM THE LEFT AND RIGHT OF
CENTER GET TOGETHER AND
SOMETIMES THEY DRAG EACH OTHER
INTO POLITICAL NO MAN'S LAND.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE CENTER LEFT
CHANCELLOR, FOLLOWED MERKEL'S
REFUGEE POLICY AND SAID PEOPLE
WERE WELCOME TO COME TO AUSTRIA
AND HE HAD TO CHANGE COURSE AND
DO AN ABOUT FACE AND TALK ABOUT
BORDER CONTROLS AND CAPS.
AND THIS IS WHAT I MEAN BY NO
MAN'S LAND.
ITS' HARD TO TRUST POLITICIANS
WHEN THEY ARE IN THIS CONTEXT
WHERE PEOPLE FROM THE FAR RIGHT
COME FROM A CERTAIN STANDPOINT
AND THE CANDIDATE HOVER TALK
HOEFER AND THAT IS SOMETHING
THAT IS JUST A CLEAR MESSAGE FOR
VOTERS.
FINALLY THE WINNER IS...
"I, DANIEL BLAKE" TAKING
HOME THE BEST PICTURE AT THIS
YEAR'S CANNES FILM FESTIVAL.
THE FILM LOOKS AT A MAN AND
WOMAN ENSNARED IN BRITAIN'S
WELFARE SYSTEM.
LOACH ALSO WON THE TOP PRIZE
IN 2006.
THAT IS ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALLISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.